
# Alphabet

- An **alphabet** $\Sigma$ is a finite, nonempty set of elements called **symbols** (or **letters**)

- A **string** over an alphabet is a finite sequence of symbols from that alphabet, usually written next to one another and not separated by commas
	- The **empty string** is denoted by $\varepsilon$ or $\lambda$
- The set of all possible strings over an alphabet $\Sigma$ is denoted by $\Sigma^*$
- The **length** of a string $w$, written $|w|$, is the number of symbols that it contains.

> notation: $a, b, c, ...$ for symbols, and $u, v, w,$ ... for string names

# Grammar

- We say that $w$ **derives** $z$ (or that $z$ is **derived** from $w$), and denote $w\Rightarrow{z}$.
- If $w_{1}\Rightarrow w_{2}\Rightarrow\dots\Rightarrow w_{n}$, we say that $w_1$ derives $w_n$ and write $w_{1}\overset{*}{\Rightarrow}{w_{n}}$
	- The $∗$ indicates that an unspecified number of steps (including zero) can be taken to derive $w_n$ from $w_1$



- Let $G = (V, T, S, P)$ be a grammar. $L(G)=\set{w\in T^{*}:S\overset{*}{\Rightarrow}w}$ is the language generated by $G$.

- We say that two grammars $G_{1}$ and $G_{2}$ are **equivalent** if they generate the same language, that is, if $L(G_{1}) = L(G_{2})$


- If $w\in L(G)$, then the sequence $S\Rightarrow{w_{1}}\Rightarrow{w_{2}}\Rightarrow\dots\Rightarrow{w_{n}}\Rightarrow{w}$ is a **derivation** of the sentence $w$. The strings $S, w_{1}, w_{2}, \dots, w_n,$ which contain variables as well as terminals, are called **sentential forms** of the derivation.

# Language


- Formal language #todo  choose good definition!!!
	- A **formal language** can be identified with the set of formulas in the language.
	- A **formal language** $L$ is a possibly infinite set of strings over a finite alphabet $\Sigma$
	- A formal language is a language that is defined by a formal system.
	- Formal language, which is a set of well-formed formulas, which are strings of symbols from an alphabet, formed by a formal grammar (consisting of production rules or formation rules).

	- A **formal language** consist of:
		- an alphabet made of an initial (usually finite) stock of basic symbols
		- a set (usually finite) of rules to produce expressions (usually with finite length) that are called formulas


- A **well-formed formula** is a finite sequence of symbols from an alphabet that is part of a formal language and validly constructed from the rules of that language. 

- A **formal language** over an alphabet $\Sigma$ is a set of strings over $\Sigma$. 
- A **formal language** over $\Sigma$ is a subset of $\Sigma^*$

> The adjective *formal* is often omitted as redundant



# Type

- A language $L$ is said to be **context-free** if and only if there is a context-free grammar $G$ such that $L=L(G)$



- regular language #todo  choose good definition!!!
	- A **regular language** over $\Sigma$ is a formal language over $\Sigma$ which is accepted by some DFA.
	- A language is called a **regular language** if some finite automaton recognizes it.




# Semantics


- A formula of a formal language is a **valid** formula if and only if it is true under every possible interpretation of the language. (in Propositional Logic, they are [[Logic/Propositional Logic/Semantic#Logical Validity|tautologies]])
