

- **Proposition** (statement) - A declarative sentence that is either true or false, but not both. 
	- A statement is **atomic** if it cannot be divided into smaller statements, otherwise it is called **molecular**.


- A **well-formed formula** (WFF, formula)
	1. Any atomic statement is a WFF
	2. Any WFF preceded by $¬$ is a WFF
	3. Any two WFFs can be made into another WFF by writing one of these symbols between them, $∧, ∨, →, ↔$ and enclosing the result in parentheses
	4. Nothing else is a WFF

- A **well-formed formula** is a finite sequence of symbols from a finite alphabet that is part of a formal language and validly constructed from the rules of that language. 





- A formula of a formal language is a **valid** formula if and only if it is true under every possible interpretation of the language. (In Propositional Logic, they are tautologies.)

- **Alphabet** $\Sigma$ is a finite, nonempty set of elements called **symbols** (or **letters**)
- A **string** (or **word**) over an alphabet is a finite sequence of symbols from that alphabet, usually written next to one another and not separated by commas
	- Empty string (empty word) - $\epsilon$ or $\lambda$
- The set of all possible words over an alphabet $\Sigma$ is denoted by $\Sigma^*$
- The **length** of a string $w$, written $|w|$, is the number of symbols that it contains.

> [!notation] 
> $a, b, c, ...$ for symbols, and $u, v, w,$ ... for string names

> In some applications, especially in logic, the **alphabet** is also known as the **vocabulary** and **words** are known as **formulas** or **sentences**; this breaks the letter/word metaphor and replaces it by a word/sentence metaphor.


- We say that $w$ **derives** $z$ (or that $z$ is **derived** from $w$), and denote $w\Rightarrow{z}$.
- If $w_{1}\Rightarrow w_{2}\Rightarrow\dots\Rightarrow w_{n}$, we say that $w_1$ derives $w_n$ and write $w_{1}\overset{*}{\Rightarrow}{w_{n}}$
	- The $∗$ indicates that an unspecified number of steps (including zero) can be taken to derive $w_n$ from $w_1$

# Formal Language

- Let $G = (V, T, S, P)$ be a grammar. $L(G)=\set{w\in T^{*}:S\overset{*}{\Rightarrow}w}$ is the language generated by $G$.

- We say that two grammars $G_{1}$ and $G_{2}$ are **equivalent** if they generate the same language, that is, if $L(G_{1}) = L(G_{2})$


- If $w\in L(G)$, then the sequence $S\Rightarrow{w_{1}}\Rightarrow{w_{2}}\Rightarrow\dots\Rightarrow{w_{n}}\Rightarrow{w}$ is a **derivation** of the sentence $w$. The strings $S, w_{1}, w_{2}, \dots, w_n,$ which contain variables as well as terminals, are called **sentential forms** of the derivation.


- Formal language #todo  choose good definition!!!
	- A **formal language** can be identified with the set of formulas in the language.
	- A **formal language** $L$ is a possibly infinite set of strings over a finite alphabet $\Sigma$
	- A formal language is a language that is defined by a formal system.
	- Formal language, which is a set of well-formed formulas, which are strings of symbols from an alphabet, formed by a formal grammar (consisting of production rules or formation rules).

	- A **formal language** consist of:
		- an alphabet made of an initial (usually finite) stock of basic symbols
		- a set (usually finite) of rules to produce expressions (usually with finite length) that are called formulas


- A **formal language** over an alphabet $\Sigma$ is a set of words over $\Sigma$. 
- A **formal language** over $\Sigma$ is a subset of $\Sigma^*$

> The adjective *formal* is often omitted as redundant


- A language $L$ is said to be **context-free** if and only if there is a context-free grammar $G$ such that $L=L(G)$

- A **formal theory** is a set of sentences expressed in a formal language
- A **formal theory** is an axiomatic system (usually formulated within model theory) that describes a set of sentences that is closed under logical implication

- regular language #todo  choose good definition!!!
	- A **regular language** over $\Sigma$ is a formal language over $\Sigma$ which is accepted by some DFA.
	- A language is called a **regular language** if some finite automaton recognizes it.


