
-  #todo  (Grammar) $\set{V_{T}, V_N , S, R}$, where $V_T$ is the set of terminal elements, $V_N$ is the set of non-terminals, $S$ is a member of $V_N$, and $R$ is a finite set of rules

- A **formal grammar** describes how to form strings from an alphabet of a formal language that are valid according to the language's syntax
- A **formal grammar** is defined as a set of production rules for such strings in a formal language.
- A **formal grammar** (consisting of production rules or formation rules).


- The rules that specify when we can replace a string from $\Sigma^*$, the set of all strings of elements in the alphabet, with another string are called **the productions of the grammar**

## (Type-0) Unrestricted Grammar


- An **unrestricted grammar** (aka: phrase structure grammar, semi-Thue) is a formal grammar $\displaystyle {\textstyle G=(N,T,P,S)}$, where
	- $\displaystyle N$ is a finite set of non-terminal symbols (or variables)
	- $\displaystyle T$ is a finite set of terminal symbols with $\displaystyle N$ and $\displaystyle T$ disjoint,
	- $\displaystyle P$ is a finite set of production rules of the form $\displaystyle \alpha \to \beta$ , where $\displaystyle \alpha$ and $\displaystyle \beta$ are strings of symbols in $\Sigma=\displaystyle N\cup T$, and $\displaystyle \alpha$ is not the empty string
	- $\displaystyle S\in N$ is a specially designated start symbol


> As the name implies, there are no real restrictions on the types of production rules that unrestricted grammars can have.

## (Type-1) Context-sensitive Grammar (CSG)

- A **context-sensitive grammar** is a formal grammar in which the left-hand sides and right-hand sides of any production rules may be surrounded by a context of terminal and nonterminal symbols. 

## (Type-2) Context-Free Grammar (CFG)

- Type-2 grammars generate the context-free languages.

- A grammar $G = (V, T, S, P)$ is said to be **context-free** if all productions in $P$ have the form $A → x$, where $A \in V$ and $x\in(V \cup T)^∗$
	- $V$ - **Non-Terminals** (variables) 
		- symbolized by uppercase $A,B,\dots$
		- $V$ is a finite set
		- Every element in $V$ is called a **nonterminal character** or a **variable**
		- Variables are also sometimes called syntactic categories. 
		- Each variable defines a sub-language of the language defined by $G$.
	- $T$ (also symbolized by $\Sigma$) - **Terminals**
		- Terminals symbolized by lowercase $a,b,\dots$
		- $T$ is a finite set of **terminals**, disjoint from $V$, which make up the actual content of the sentence. The set of terminals is the alphabet of the language defined by the grammar $G$.
	- $P$ (also symbolized by a $R$) is a finite relation in $\displaystyle V\times (V\cup T )^{*}$, where the asterisk represents the Kleene star operation. 
		- The members of $P$ are called or the **productions rule** (or rewrite rules) of the grammar 
	- $S$ is the **start** variable (or start symbol), used to represent the whole sentence (or program). It must be an element of $V$.



- A derivation is said to be **leftmost** if in each step the leftmost variable in the sentential form is replaced. If in each step the rightmost variable is replaced, we call the derivation **rightmost**.

- A context-free grammar $G$ is said to be **ambiguous** if there exists some $w∈L(G)$ that has at least two distinct derivation trees. Alternatively, ambiguity implies the existence of two or more leftmost or rightmost derivations.
- A context-free grammar is in **Chomsky normal form** (CNF) if every rule is of the form $A\to BC$,  $A\to \alpha$, or $S\to \epsilon$. for some variable $A∈V$, some terminal symbol $\alpha∈Σ$, and some variables $B,C∈V∖{S}$.

- Any production of a context-free grammar of the form $A → λ$ is called a λ-**production**. Any variable $A$ for which the derivation $A \overset{*}⇒ λ$ is possible is called **nullable**.
- Any production of a context-free grammar of the form $A → B$, where $A, B ∈ V$ , is called a **unit-production**.




- THEOREM - Any context-free language is generated by a context-free grammar in Chomsky normal form.





## Regular (Type-3) grammars



